[Music]
in fiction and especially in the stories
of HP Lovecraft often characters meets
some alien being who lives somewhere we
reality works differently a particular
favorite phrase of Lovecraft's was the
save these places have non Euclidean
geometry usually the very sight is such
a strange mind-bending place is enough
to drive the protagonist a little bit
insane but what is not nuclear in
geometry and would it really break our
brains well first what does Euclidean
mean the word comes from Euclid an
ancient Greek who wrote the first great
work on geometry an incredibly famous
book called the elements which has had
more editions published in the 2,000
years people have been reading it than
any book except the Bible in the
elements
Euclid goes about proving all the facts
about circles triangles and parallel
lines you're probably familiar with from
school like how angles in a triangle add
up to 180 degrees
but proofs can't start from nothing so
there are a couple of claims you've had
made right at the beginning but she had
to leave unproved we call these axioms
now most of these axioms are pretty
obvious sounding they're things like you
can draw a line between any two points
and you can draw a circle of any size
around any given point
so you Clippers happy to leave them
unproved but the fifth and final axiom
also known as the parallel postulate
wasn't like the others the others are
nice and simple but the parallel
postulate looks more like a theorem but
nobody can figure out how you might
prove the parallel postulate from the
first four axioms still people went and
use these five axioms to do geometry
this kind of geometry using Euclid's
axioms or rules is called Euclidean
geometry
what is not new Lydian geometry it all
comes down to that suspicious fifth
axiom the parallel postulate it turns
out that the search for a proof of it
was in vain in other words you can do
geometry just fine without it
if you do choose to do geometry where
the parallel postulate is false then
this is called non Euclidean geometry
non Euclidean geometry actually comes in
lots of different flavors because there
are lots of ways for parallel postulate
can be false first instead of saying
there's exactly one parallel line
through any point maybe you say there
are none this is called elliptical
geometry you can think of how this would
look by imagining doing geometry on the
surface of a sphere rather than on a
flat piece of paper here what we call
lines are the circles going where on the
fattest part of the sphere such as the
equator if you take any two of these
circles they meet each other twice so no
two lines around a parallel as a bonus
the angles in a triangle add up to more
than 180 degrees here second you can say
there are many parallel lines through
any one point this is called hyperbolic
geometry and it's a little harder to
picture that electrical geometry but by
no means brain breaking lycée to picture
it in our normal Euclidean world you
have to picture doing geometry on a disk
and represent what we call lines with
circular arcs which meet the edge of the
disk right angles if you take any one of
these lines and a point outside of it
you can draw as many lines not touching
it as you want through that point so
there has lots of parallels now if
you're still watching this video and not
rocking backward and forward muttering
Cotuit for target then congratulations
you've comprehended the horror of
non-euclidean geometry without your
brain breaking but you might think these
ways to visualize non Euclidean geometry
may be there in some sense cheating X
for all it seemed like we're merely
building a model of non-euclidean
geometry in Euclidean space a little
version of it we can look down on from a
safety of our familiar Euclidean
what would it be like to actually see
non-euclidean geometry from the inside
well there are a couple of things we can
definitively say about this first you
might not need to imagine being inside a
non Euclidean world because our world
might not be Euclidean we know it
basically looks Euclidean up close on
the small scales you'd do measurements
on earth that but so does non Euclidean
geometry we don't know what the universe
looks like exactly on big scales but it
may well be non Euclidean especially
given that the fabric of space-time can
be bent by massive objects like stars or
black holes second you can actually try
out being inside a non Euclidean world
there's a free VR simulation of being
inside a 3d version of hyperbolic
geometry you can try it right now in
your browser it's trippy but it won't
drive you to insanity they may not break
your brain but in an important sense
non-euclidean geometries are exactly
what love Pratt's fictional world was
about for thousands of years we thought
the world of geometry was safe and
familiar and small we thought it was
inconceivable any of Euclid's axioms
could be false but much like the poor
poor humans of Lovecraft's works who
realized the universe is a tiny
insignificant part of a terrifying and
weird greater reality we realized that
the familiar realm of Euclid was just
one small part of a whole world of
strange non familiar kinds of geometry
which is certainly mind-bending if not
quite it might breaking